---
layout: post
title:  If a Statistical Model Predicts That Common Events Should Occur Only Once in 10,000 Elections, Maybe it’s the Wrong Model
description: Statistical description is not anything goes. Important quantities of interest arise from generatively accurate models— which inform our understanding of American democracy.
date:   2023-03-01 15:01:35 +0300
author: danny
image:  '/images/MedianVoteEBar.jpg#wide'
tags:   [electoral systems, bayesian, statistics]
tags_color: '#477690'
---

<b>Authors:</b> Danny Ebanks. Jonathan N. Katz. Gary King.<br>
<b>Paper:</b> <a href="https://gking.harvard.edu/files/gking/files/10k.pdf"> Download</a> <br>
<b>Supplementary Appendix:</b> <a href="https://gking.harvard.edu/files/gking/files/10k-supp.pdf"> Download</a>

## Abstract

Political scientists forecast elections, not primarily to satisfy public interest, but to validate statistical models used for estimating many quantities of scholarly interest. Although we have learned a great deal from these models, they can be embarrassingly overconfident: Events that should occur once in 10,000 elections occur almost every year, and even those which should occur once in a trillion-trillion elections are sometimes observed. We develop a novel generative statistical model of US district-level congressional elections, validate it with extensive out-of-sample tests, and use it to compute the first correctly calibrated probabilities of incumbent losses, one of the most important quantities for evaluating a democracy.  We find that even when marginals vanish, incumbency advantage grows, and other dramatic changes occur, the risk of an out-party incumbent losing a midterm election contest has been high and essentially constant since the 1950s. We then develop a broader theory of American democracy consistent with the results from our generative model and discuss the broader implications of our generative modeling strategy.